Code of Conduct: Short Synopsis

This Short Synopsis is intended to summarize the Code of Conduct for easy reference and understanding; it is not intended to replace the full Code. Words in bold in this Synopsis are specific references to items and ideas that are dealt with in detail in the full Code. 

Key Principles 

This Code is precedent upon three key principles, from which all else follows. These are:

Truth: we are scientists, so we strive for honesty in our research and our interpersonal interactions.

Respect: we are all human beings, so we readily offer respect, and expect it in return.

Inclusion: we are professionals, so we value and promote diversity and inclusion.

Commitments & Challenges

We are committed to represent the project professionally at all times, to act with integrity, to respect everyone we come into contact with, and to wholeheartedly accept the full diversity of the group, while rejecting discrimination, harassment, bigotry, and any other conduct contrary to our key principles. Field work challenges include remote, physically and mentally taxing conditions, the potentially constant and close proximity to our crewmates, the fluid and sometimes nonexistent boundaries between work and personal life, the potential lack of any personal space, and the previous histories we each bring to the research endeavor. By honoring our commitments as a team, we can more effectively overcome these challenges. 

Prohibited Conduct

We will not tolerate any form of harassment (see Definitions section), coercion, threatening, abusive or disrespectful behavior, or sexual misconduct. There will be no alcohol or other drug use permitted while conducting field work, even when legally permissible. Additionally, it is prohibited to obstruct or disrupt research and living conditions, to possess or use a gun or other weapon (unless expressly permitted), to physically or verbally abuse another person, to damage or steal property, or to incite others to do any of these things. 

Important Policies

This list is non-exhaustive but covers the most important parts. Please read the full Code.

Project leadership will provide a clear organization chart specifying hierarchical relationships.
Treat everyone with respect and dignity, including respecting race, ethnicity, and gender identity.
Any human subjects research must be approved by an Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) approved Institutional Review Board (IRB) in the US, or equivalent.
Respect local laws (including permitting requirements), and treat fairly everyone helping with the research, including with fair compensation and recognition of their contributions. 
Communicate about the project openly and honestly. 
Sexual misconduct and sexual/gender-based harassment will be dealt with in a way that is victim-directed, focused on offender behavior, and ensures fair process for everyone involved. 
New relationships are prohibited during the course of field work to avoid conflicts of interest. 
Conflicts of interest, including existing intimate relationships, must be disclosed ahead of time.
If a violation is reported, only the person with authority/power is subject to punishment to protect victims in coercive relationships.
Reporting Violations 
Because we are an inter-institutional group, there is not a single governing body to deal with concerns. We address this by designating at least two Field Ethics Officers, who are responsible for fielding reports of potential violations, and making sure everyone understands this Code. Any suspected violations of this policy should be reported to one of the Field Ethics Officers. Additionally, we have an Ethics Partner Institution, whose policies and code of conduct we all agree to be bound by, where this Code does not provide clear direction. Those are: 
Field Ethics Officers:_________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________
Ethics Partner Institution: _____________________________________________________________
Any type of retaliation for reporting, or participating in an investigation, is strictly forbidden. 
Reporting to Partner Organizations 
The Field Ethics Officers will be familiar with funding and other partner organizations’ reporting requirements for potential or actual violations of conduct standards, and will promptly report such violations as required. The Field Ethics Officers will be responsible for taking direction from these organizations in the event of an outside investigation. 
Investigation Process
When a concern is reported, an investigation will take place to resolve the matter consistent with applicable laws while demonstrating respect for everyone involved, and maintaining anonymity of all parties whenever possible. The Field Ethics Officers will be responsible for conducting a thorough, objective investigation if one of the institutions sponsoring the field work does not take the lead on conducting the investigation. Unless otherwise directed by a sponsoring institution, the Field Ethics Officers will be responsible for determining the facts of the case through interviews and preparation of an objective, written report. 
Outcomes and Sanctions
Outcomes of any investigation will be directed towards implementing solutions based on the findings of the investigation, with the goal of minimizing the potential reoccurrence of any conduct violations. Sanctions can include everything from official reprimand up to removal from the project entirely and prohibition from future collaboration. There are a variety of additional actions that may be necessary and appropriate in furtherance of the objectives and intentions of this Code. The Field Ethics Officers may remove a team member from the project during an investigation, as they deem necessary.
Code of Conduct for Inter-Institutional Field Work
Key Principles
We are a group of researchers united in our pursuit of knowledge, regardless of the particular discipline, training, or credentials that we each bring to this endeavor. Each of us will have an important part to play in the work to come. To aid in this work, we must have a clear understanding of the boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable conduct, as well as their consequences. This document, the Code of Conduct for Inter-Institutional Field Work, is intended to provide such an understanding.
	We collectively commit to certain key principles, which will guide our conduct during shared and individual activities associated with this project. These principles are: 
Truth: we are scientists and researchers, engaged in the creation and discovery of knowledge. We commit to truth, which transcends our professional goals and informs the way we interact with each other, fostering a culture of honesty and trust within the group. 
Respect: we are a group of human beings, each with unique thoughts, insecurities, and desires. We commit to treating everyone with the dignity and the respect that we expect for ourselves, providing due regard for the rights, emotions, and traditions of every member of the project.
Inclusion: as scientists, we recognize the strength and beauty of diversity, and celebrate that with inclusion. We recognize ourselves as a heterogeneous group, including different races, religions, spiritualities, ethnicities, gender identities, sexual orientations, and many other expressions. 
Our commitment to these key principles guides our adoption of this Code of Conduct, for this shared endeavor that we have embarked upon. When it is unclear what course of action is best, we will reflect upon these key principles, and let them inform our judgment. Although this Code specifically addresses many ethics and conduct issues, it cannot cover all possible situations. 
Commitments 
Guided by the Key Principles, we acknowledge the following priorities and commitments, for the project upon which this group of researchers is about to embark. We will:
Represent the project and our home and partner institutions professionally at all times; 
Approach personal and professional interactions with honesty and integrity;
Practice personal and academic integrity and expect it from others;
Promote a culture of respect, always recognizing the personal dignity and essential worth of all individuals, including their privacy, property, and freedom;
Reject bigotry, discrimination, violence, or intimidation of any kind;
Not tolerate sexual and gender-based harassment and violence;
Promote the diversity of opinions, ideas, and backgrounds, which is the lifeblood of the research community;
Avoid discrimination, favoritism, abuse of professional authority, and bribery in any form; 
Avoid conflicts of interest, real or perceived, and disclose unavoidable conflicts;
Actively support this Code of Conduct, including by reporting violations.
These priorities and commitments form the basis of sound working relationships for everyone. We recognize that this is not an exhaustive list, but is intended to provide an ethical foundation with which to approach our professional and personal interactions throughout the time that we are engaged in this field work project.
Challenges
We acknowledge the following unique challenges presented by this inter-institutional field work project that we are about to undertake:
Remote and physically taxing field conditions;
Physically close working and living conditions;
Porous and organic boundaries between work and personal life; 
Lack of personal space; and
Previous work and personal histories among project participants. 
We acknowledge these and possibly other challenges at the forefront of our shared field work, with the understanding that foreknowledge engenders preparation, and will result in professional and personal relations grounded by our Commitments and Key Principles — truth, respect, and inclusion — which are all the more important in the context of overcoming these challenges.
Prohibited Conduct
The field portion of the project requires unusual care and consideration with regard to our personal interactions. As members of a team during an expedition, we must always be aware of how our behaviors and actions might impact others on the team. To protect all members of our expedition, for the duration of the project, not only must work hours and spaces be regulated, but also after-hours (personal) time and spaces. 
To that end, harassment in any form, sexual misconduct or disrespectful behavior will not be tolerated. Due to the potential risks involved, there will be no alcohol or other drugs permitted while conducting field work or other project-related activities, even in cases where it would be legally permissible. In the intensive field conditions under which we will be operating during this project, the following behaviors are deemed unacceptable:
Sexual misconduct of any kind;
Sexual or gender-based harassment of any kind;
Harassment of any kind;
Use, possession, or distribution of alcohol or illegal drugs at field work sites, or other sites where project-related work is being conducted;
Willful obstruction or disruption of research, living conditions, teaching, administration, or other project activities;
Possession or use of guns, firearms, explosives, or other dangerous weapons at research sites or other sites where project activities take place, unless specifically sanctioned by the project leadership;
Detention, intimidation, and physical or verbal abuse intended to threaten imminent bodily harm or endanger the health of any person at field work sites or other sites where project-related work is being conducted;
Willful and malicious damage, misuse, or theft of project property, or the property of others;
Coercion or inciting others to engage in any unacceptable behavior or to perform any of the acts prohibited herein.
Specific Sections 
Definitions
We offer the following definitions, to make clear some of the boundaries that will be necessary to maintain during this project. These definitions are provided to give context for understanding behaviors that may constitute misconduct, and are not intended to limit the scope or application of our Key Principles under this Code of Conduct.
Conflicts of Interest are oppositions between the private interests and the professional responsibilities of a person in a position of trust, power, and/or authority. Such conflicts may result in a situation in which personal considerations have the potential to influence or compromise professional judgment in administration, research, instruction, or other project activities. Conflicts of interest can be due to personal relationships (intimate or otherwise), financial entanglements (e.g., owning a potential research site), or any number of other situations. It is not necessary for such influence to have occurred before a situation can be identified as a conflict of interest; it is sufficient for the situation to appear to provide the potential for judgment to be compromised. A person with a potential conflict of interest has a duty to disclose it, so that appropriate measures may be taken to avoid an actual conflict of interest. This may include removal of the conflicted individual from decision making in relation to the conflict, or other measures that may be necessary to resolve it appropriately. 
Discriminatory harassment is defined as conduct that unreasonably discriminates among individuals on the basis of race, color, sex, gender, national origin, age, religion, marital status, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, physical appearance, political views, or any other differentiating characteristic of identity, history, or genetics, and that is sufficiently severe or pervasive that it interferes with work or academic performance by creating a hostile work environment. Discriminatory harassment includes, but is not limited to: racial harassment, which is conduct that disparages, ridicules, or physically abuses a person based on race; gender-based harassment, which is conduct that disparages, ridicules, or physically abuses a person based on that person’s sex, gender, gender identity, gender presentation, or gender expression; sexual harassment, defined below.
Hostile work environments exist when a group member feels uncomfortable or scared to be in their work space due to offensive behavior, intimidation, abuse, or other harassment by a coworker or superior. Conduct that creates hostile work environments is strictly prohibited.
Personal space is any location where a crew member can reasonably be said to have ownership of that space, such as personal tents or bedrooms. It should be noted that in many instances of remote field work, crew members may not have access to personal space at all (e.g., when bedrooms are shared, that space cannot be reasonably said to be owned by only one crew member, and is thus considered part of the workplace). 
Sexual harassment is defined by as any verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature, when submission to such is either explicitly or implicitly used as a basis or condition for decisions affecting that person, including continuation with the project or evaluation of their performance; or when such conduct is unwelcome and sufficiently severe or pervasive that it interferes with work or academic performance by creating a hostile work environment. Sexual harassment includes (but is not limited to) sexual misconduct (see below), sex and gender-based stalking, sex and gender-based harassment and bullying, dating violence, and domestic violence. Sexual harassment may be committed by any person upon any other person, regardless of the sex, gender, sexual orientation, and/or gender identity of those involved. 
Sexual misconduct is defined as any single or repeated episode of nonconsensual personal contact or unwelcome sexual advance. Any single episode can be sufficient for a finding of sexual misconduct. Nonconsensual personal contact occurs when a person imposes contact of a sexual nature on another person, causing emotional distress, without having first obtained explicit consent, or when they know or should have known that the person was incapable of explicit consent by reason of intoxication, power dynamics, mental disorder, mental incapacitation, or physical helplessness. 
Working relationships include all relationships with other crew members, field assistants and guides, field station staff, and all other people working to aid the research endeavor. During field work, much as all shared spaces are considered part of the workplace, these relationships should explicitly be considered working relationships. In the close confines of field work, it is impossible to have a relationship that is purely personal, because each crew member is representing the project at all times. This should be kept in mind: even interactions that happen late in the evening, when no work activities are happening, are interactions between co-workers, and should be treated as such, with all due consideration and respect. 
Workplace, for the duration of field work, includes all shared spaces, environments, and infrastructure, including but not limited to kitchens, sleeping quarters, common areas, laboratories, field research sites, all modes of transportation (including but not limited to motor vehicles, trains, airplanes), trails and walkways, and any other location where it might reasonably be expected that members of the crew could interact with one another, including sleeping quarters. 
Organizational Relationships
We recognize that field work has a history of being a time when normal institutional rules and standards are relaxed or absent, which has led to a great deal of problematic relationships, nonconsensual sexual encounters, and undocumented harassment, particularly of female students and technicians. We are committed to changing that dynamic in our own field work. As part of that, project leadership will provide a clear organization chart representing the organizational positions of all crew members. We know that not all relationships that include power differentials will be obvious from such an organizational chart, but we recognize this as a necessary first step in ensuring everyone’s health and safety. Such a chart should attempt to address any and all instructional, evaluative, formal advisory, supervisory or other formal hierarchical relationships, as well as hard-to-define aspects of power differentials, such as seniority and position in project planning processes.
Research Ethics in the Field
Following from our key principles, we will approach our research with ethics and integrity. We will carefully consider the impacts of our research, both immediate and long-term, on the sites, organisms, and peoples involved, directly or tangentially. It is paramount to consider the implications and motivations of our research, and to craft our study designs in ways that minimize harm, be it to particular people or the global community. This is a particularly grave concern for research involving human subjects. Here, we commit to certain best practices for engaging in field research: 
IRB Approval. Any research with human subjects must reflect a thoughtful and culturally appropriate consideration of the effects of the inquiry on the participants, and should, in general, include a clear process for obtaining informed consent from participants. To that end, all human subjects research must be approved by an Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) accredited Institutional Review Board (IRB), or the equivalent thereof, for research based outside of the United States of America. If it is unclear which institution’s IRB or equivalent has authority over approving the human subjects research, the project should pursue approval through the Ethics Partner Institution (see below, Reporting Potential Violations & Addressing Concerns). This policy does not replace or supersede the policies of whatever home institution the human subjects research originates at, but complements such policies. 
Permits and Local Laws. We are committed to respectful treatment of our hosts, both locally and internationally, while engaged in field work, and this includes honoring local laws and customs with respect to research norms and practices. This may include things like required permits that are not standard in our own countries (e.g., sample mobilization permits, or export permits), deposition of samples or sample duplicates in local natural history or medical collections, and many other things. We are committed to meeting the standards of the Nagoya Protocol, regardless of governing laws. It is our responsibility to determine the requirements of research in a particular location before we undertake such research. It should also be noted that countries or localities in which human subjects research is carried out may have particular permitting and ethical regulations. 
Data Management. Ethical data management in inter-institutional settings is complex, but necessary. As the first necessary precursor to ethical data management, the project leadership commits to having an established Data Management Plan (DMP) before field work begins. That DMP will, at a minimum: clearly define ownership of data, noting that data generated are not the property of any individual, but the institutions and research groups which generated them; define points of access to data, and who will serve in stewardship roles of the data; ensure that appropriate steps are taken to obtain consent to collect and share data (following Nagoya Protocol guidelines whenever possible); provide provisions protecting the identity of human subjects and their personal identifying information; and specify mechanisms governing the licensing of data. Most academic institutions will have help available for data management planning; we highly recommend that project leadership make use of such resources when developing their Data Management Plan. 
Fair Treatment. Often, in isolated field settings we are working with field guides, parabiologists, or other local people helping to ensure that our research is a success, such as cooks, housekeepers, muleskinners, porters, translators, volunteers, and other laborers with or without experience. We acknowledge that we would not be able to engage in research without such help, and are thus committed to fair treatment of people involved in our research, regardless of their status as group members. Fair treatment involves fair compensation, appropriate to local norms, for services provided, and acknowledgement of their contributions to the advancement of science. We will allocate project resources in a way that prevents the frequent dynamic of research as an extractionist activity, moving knowledge and other resources from developing to developed countries. Additionally, we are committed to ensuring that the products of our research are available to those closest to that research. 
Conflicts of Interest. Any potential conflict of interest must be disclosed to the project leadership so that appropriate measures can be taken to resolve it in advance of the field work. This is particularly important to consider in cases where research involves human subjects. When conflicts of interest arise involving research subjects, the interests of the communities within which the research takes place should take precedence, including over the success of the project. 
Honest Representation. We will not misrepresent the work of others as our own work, either in speaking or writing. We will give full credit to all those who have contributed to our work.
Corruption and Bribery. We are committed to strict avoidance of bribery and petty corruption in the context of our field work; even when corruption is common in the world, we attempt to fight it.
Extra care must be taken with human subjects research. In such cases we will ensure that: 
The right of those providing information to researchers either to remain anonymous or to receive recognition is to be respected and defended. It is our responsibility to make every effort to determine the preferences of those providing information and to comply with their wishes. It should be made clear to anyone providing information that despite our best intentions and efforts, anonymity may be compromised or recognition may fail to materialize. Additionally, we should strive never to reveal the identity of groups or persons whose anonymity is protected through the use of pseudonyms, either accidentally or purposefully.
We are candid from the outset in the communities where we work about the nature of our research, our identities, and our goals. The aims of our study project should be clearly and fully communicated to those among whom we work at the onset of research. We must acknowledge the help and services we receive, and we must recognize our obligation to reciprocate in culturally appropriate ways. To the best of our abilities, we will make explicit the extent to which our own personal and cultural values affect the project. We have an obligation to assess both the positive and negative consequences of our field work. We will do our best to anticipate any possible consequences, and to inform individuals and groups likely to be affected. 
Diversity & Respect
Respect for the human diversity that makes up our group, and the people with whom we work, follows clearly from our key principles — truth, respect, and inclusion. We will treat all people with respect, regardless of their race, religion, culture, neurological diversity, disability, sex, gender, sexuality, gender expression or identity, or any other differentiating characteristic of identity, history, or genetics. All people are people, first and foremost, and deserve respect. 
We recognize that we are all products of our individual experiences, and as such that we each carry with us implicit biases, the unconscious attribution of particular qualities to members of a certain group (Greenwald & Krieger 2006). We commit to maintain conscious effort to challenge our implicit biases, and to not allow them to impact our professional and personal relationships. We will take feedback in this regard with open minds and hearts, recognizing that any feedback is a reflection of compassion and respect — being given the opportunity to alter one’s actions and ideas is an invitation, and should not be construed as a personal attack. 
Discrimination/Harassment. We will not tolerate any form of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), or disrespectful treatment based on race or gender. Such conduct is a violation of this Code of Conduct; any incident of discrimination, harassment, or violence based on gender identity or expression will be given immediate and effective attention (see below, Sexual Misconduct & Sexual/Gender-based Harassment). 

Race, Ethnicity, & Nationality

Scientific spaces have not historically been representative of Black, Indigenous, or Latinx people (see: Bernard and Cooperdock, 2018). We acknowledge that addressing racial inequality is not simply a matter of increasing representation, but doing the work to foster truly equitable, safe, and empowering spaces for Black, Indigenous and Latinx people in particular. Racial discrimination remains a central issue for inclusion, safety, retention, and success (both short- and long-term) of the aforementioned groups.
The history of colonialism and imperialism is still ongoing, and shapes the context in which we work, no matter our scientific discipline. As such, racial imbalances can be further exacerbated by global power and resource disparities, particularly when researchers from the Global North are conducting field work within communities in the Global South. It is not uncommon for foreign researchers to rely on the labor of local people without appropriately crediting their knowledge with authorship and/or explicit acknowledgement in publication, depending on their role (see above, Research Ethics in the Field). Furthermore, members of these groups are likely to feel less comfortable advocating for their personal and intellectual rights for fear of dismissal, isolation, or retaliation.
It is therefore imperative that we reflect critically on the potentially racist practices of our research group, in order to create safer spaces. We strongly recommend that before any project is initiated, all Principal Investigators refer to Chaudhary and Berhe’s “Ten simple rules for building an anti-racist lab” (2020). We summarize the ten rules here, but encourage everyone involved in the project to read the original publication thoroughly.
Lead informed discussions about anti-racism in the lab regularly;
Address racism in the lab and field safety guidelines;
Publish papers and write grants with Black, Indigenous, or Latinx colleagues;
Evaluate the lab’s mentoring practices;
Amplify voices of Black, Indigenous, or Latinx scientists;
Support Black, Indigenous, or Latinx people in their efforts to organize;
Intentionally recruit Black, Indigenous, or Latinx students and staff;
Adopt a dynamic research agenda;
Advocate for racially diverse leadership in science; and
Hold the powerful accountable and don’t expect gratitude for doing what is rational.
Based on these ten rules, we provide the following guiding principles and policies:
Engagement. Project Leadership will actively engage with anti-rascist work as an essential part of the scientific endeavour. This includes, but is not limited to, ensuring that Field Ethics Officers have access to appropriate resources and training in these complex issues; that issues of racial equality are part of initial and on-going team conversations around this Code of Conduct and other Conduct related issues; and engaging with and supporting organizations within or adjacent to our research endeavor that are engaged in racial justice work. 
Recognition. As stated above (Research Ethics in the Field, section 4. Fair Treatment), all work will be appropriately acknowledged. It is important that we actively work against the long-entrenched patterns of racism and colonialism within our field, and as such we are committed to the recognition of work in our project, including authorship and acknowledgement in scientific publication. This is particularly important when it comes to our local partners, who have historically been excluded from such recognition.
Advocacy. Project leadership commits to ongoing advocacy for underrepresented racial groups—particularly Black, Indigenous, and Latinx people—within the project. This commitment includes intentional recruitment of qualified crew members from these groups and ongoing advocacy within our own project as well as the larger scientific community. Ethics Officers are specifically tasked with helping to actively hold Project Leadership accountable to these commitments.
Any suspected violations of this policy should be reported to the Field Ethics Officers (see below, Reporting Potential Violations). This Code aims to create safer workspaces for everyone, and any crew member making good faith reports under this policy, or participating in an investigation initiated under this policy, will be protected from retaliation for such reporting or participation.

Gender Identity & Expression

In addition to a history of racial inequalities, science has a long history of gender inequality that has affected the careers and advancement potential of women and LGBTQIA+ individuals. To address this history, we reaffirm our commitment to interrogating our implicit biases and our commitment to actively working toward parity and justice with regards to gender and sexuality in the sciences. Based upon our Key Principles we provide the following guiding principles and policies:
Privacy. All group members have the right to openly discuss any aspect of their gender identity or expression. In particular, a transgender or gender-nonconforming group members’ gender identity or expression is theirs to discuss if they wish to share their private information. Information about a person’s transgender status (such as the sex they were assigned at birth) can constitute confidential medical information under privacy laws (such as HIPAA in the United States). Project leadership and all crew members with formal or informal authority shall not disclose information that may reveal a crew member’s personal information (including transgender status or gender non-conforming presentation) to others. Such information may only be shared subsequent to the crew member in question’s consent.
Names & Pronouns. Every crew member has the right to be addressed by the name and pronoun that corresponds with their gender identity. A court-ordered name or gender change is not required. The intentional or persistent refusal to respect any crew member’s gender identity (for example, intentionally referring to someone by a name or pronoun that does not correspond to that person’s gender identity) can constitute harassment and is a violation of this Code. If uncertain as to what pronoun a transitioning or gender non-conforming crew member might prefer, politely ask them how they would like to be addressed. We recommend cultivating gender-neutral language (e.g., singular you or they), using a person’s name in place of pronouns if one is unsure, and practicing regularly with pronouns that are difficult to remember. These practices work towards avoiding mistakes and encourage respect between all group members.
Sex-segregated Facilities & Activities. For sex-segregated tasks and the use of sex-segregated facilities, transgender crew members will be classified and assigned in a manner consistent with their gender identity, not their sex assigned at birth. 
Crew members shall have access to the restroom corresponding to their gender identity. Any crew member who has a need or desire for increased privacy, regardless of the underlying reason, will be provided access to a single-stall restroom, when available; no crew member, however, shall be required to use such a restroom. All crew members have a right to safe and appropriate restroom facilities, including the right to use a restroom that corresponds to the crew member’s gender identity, regardless of the crew member’s sex assigned at birth. That is, transgender women must be permitted to use the women’s restroom, and transgender men must be permitted to use the men’s restroom. 
The decision of how to sort into sex-segregated spaces and activities should be left to the transgender or gender non-conforming crew member to determine the most appropriate and safest option for them. Their decision will be respected by both the project leadership and the entire crew. 
Sexual Misconduct & Sexual/Gender-based Harassment
Sexual misconduct and sexual/gender-based harassment and violence, as well as all forms of discriminatory harassment and disrespectful treatment, are strictly prohibited. We recognize that these behaviors are contrary to our core principles of truth, respect, and inclusion, and detrimental to the research endeavor we are collectively engaged in. These behaviors will not be tolerated.
We are committed to fostering a research and field experience that is free of all forms of abuse, assault, harassment, coercive and disrespectful conduct, including sexual misconduct. As such, we do not tolerate sexual misconduct by group members in any form whatsoever. We have a responsibility to enact, improve, and enforce the prevention of sexual misconduct, support victims, and to obtain appropriate resolution to prevent recurrence. 
In cases where there is suspected or alleged sexual misconduct, we are committed to a thorough and objective resolution process that is, as much as is possible, victim-directed. Sexual and gender-based harassment and violence, no matter the form it takes, is an alienating experience for the victim, and often removes their sense of agency and control of their environment and choices. We seek to counter this by giving as much control as possible back to victims at each step of the process. Field Ethics Officers and project leadership will ensure that victims are consulted throughout the process, and that their thoughts and desires are taken seriously. We will do everything in our power to provide access to reasonable resources, including advocacy and institutional resources, emotional support, assistance with impacted research tasks, and aid in initiation of any desired legal proceedings, such as arbitration or restraining orders. We will provide clear and complete explanations of options, decisions, and actions in all cases. 
We recognize that regardless of circumstances (including use of drugs/alcohol, previous relationships, style of dress, and sexual history), there is no excuse for non-consensual sexual activity. As such, all investigations and resolutions of sexual misconduct instances will be focused on offender behavior in relation to clear definitions of prohibited conduct (see above, Definitions). 
We are committed to a fair, objective, and thorough process in all investigations and resolutions related to sexual misconduct in all of its myriad forms. Clearly defined prohibited conduct relating to sexual misconduct serves as the basis for all determinations of responsibility and appropriate sanctions. The definitions used for judging misconduct are provided above; they are adapted from the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), and are not intended to limit the scope or application of our Key Principles under this Code. The EEOC provides additional guidance for judging sexual harassment and misconduct (see also, Additional Resources). 
See below (sections Reporting Potential Violations and Addressing Concerns) for guidelines on appropriate action if someone in the group is the victim of sexual misconduct or sexual/gender-based harassment. Any crew member making good faith reports under this policy, or participating in investigation (internal or external) initiated under this policy, will be protected from retaliation for such reporting or participation.

Conflicts of Interest and Abuses of Power

Pre-existing relationships have the potential to create conflicts of interest within the community of researchers involved in this project. This includes domestic partners and spouses, and other forms of sexual or intimate relationships. Such relationships can create conflicts of interest in the context of the project when one individual has, or could reasonably expect to have, responsibility for supervising, directing, overseeing, evaluating, advising, or influencing the actions or educational status of the other. See Definitions, above.
	
 We are interested in creating a research environment marked by professional behavior, mutual respect, and fair treatment for all project participants. As such, we are concerned with the possible conflicts of interest that may result from intimate relationships, because such conflicts of interest may lead to serious abuses of power, coercion, exploitation, favoritism, or unfair treatment of others. Any relationship where one individual has power over the other has the potential to seriously affect morale and lead to an intolerable research environment. Power differentials may be impacted by gender, race, ethnicity, age, and relative authority or station within the group dynamic, and these categories may have multiplicative effects. Further, even a romantic relationship that begins in a consensual way may become uncomfortable or nonconsensual, leading to sexual harassment or sexual misconduct. 
Given these issues with conflicts of interest arising from intimate relationships, we agree that: 

No member of the research team will solicit, initiate or enter into a sexual, physically intimate, or romantic relationship with any other crew member (including local staff, who may not be specifically governed by this Code) during the course of field work and associated project activities. 
We recognize that this is an especially strict prohibition, and we agree to it with the understanding that the research endeavor we are about to undertake will bring us into extreme conditions, of both physical hardship and close physical proximity, and that we will all need clear heads and professional conduct for this to be a successful research experience. We also agree to it recognizing the largely undiscussed history of field work as a time when normal institutional rules and standards are relaxed or absent, which has led to a great deal of problematic relationships, nonconsensual sexual encounters, and undocumented harassment, particularly of female students and technicians. We are committed to changing that dynamic in our own field work.
Any relationship can take unexpected turns, but those that develop under the particular combination of isolation, physical and mental stress, and close proximity that result from field work may be particularly likely to end uncomfortably. We recognize that in the close confines of field work, it is often impossible to take space away from people, a frequent need for people coming out of an intimate relationship, even a short-lived one. Additionally, we acknowledge that under the particular conditions of field work, where group members are isolated together for days to months, it can often be difficult to judge consent clearly, because decision-making may be altered by the particular social and physical conditions of field work. These factors all lead us to accept the prohibition on new intimate relationships. 
Pre-existing relationships must be disclosed to the project leadership, before the start of field work, so that appropriate arrangements can be made. Pre-existing relationships are intimate or romantic relationships that exist between crew members prior to the start of field work and associated project activities. Appropriate arrangements are actions reasonably calculated to remove or mitigate known or potential conflicts of interest or abuses of power, taking into account the interests of the project, the parties in the relationship, and other group members actually or potentially affected.
Only the member of the research team with instructional, evaluative, formal advisory, supervisory, or other hierarchical authority or power is subject to sanction for violation of this policy. We recognize that intimate relationships may begin or become coercive in nature, and that power dynamics may be exacerbated in situations where the vulnerable party feels at risk for exposing the relationship. To ameliorate this potential situation, we commit to careful evaluation of power dynamics in any potential Code violation, and protection of the vulnerable party in all conduct investigations. 
Any suspected violations of this policy should be reported to the Field Ethics Officers (see below, Reporting Potential Violations). Any crew member making good faith reports under this policy, or participating in investigation (internal or external) initiated under this policy, will be protected from retaliation for such reporting or participation. 
We expect all crew members to treat each other with decorum and respect, regardless of pre-existing relationships and potential conflicts of interest. We recognize that, in the close confines and physically, mentally, and emotionally taxing environment of remote field work, even the best of relationships may be strained. In the event of pre-existing relationships, Field Ethics Officers (see below) and project leadership will check in with all members of the relationship regularly, and determine if additional appropriate arrangements are necessary to avoid or mitigate any adverse effects such pre-existing relationships may have on morale, project success, and personal well-being of all involved.
Reporting Potential Violations & Addressing Concerns
Any crew member making good faith reports under this Code of Conduct, or participating in investigation (internal or external) initiated under this policy, will be protected from retaliation for such reporting or participation.

Designation of Field Ethics Officers

The project leadership will designate at least two people as Field Ethics Officers for the duration of the field work and the project, and ensure that everyone in the group is aware of who the Field Ethics Officers are. The Field Ethics Officers will be responsible for (1) aiding group members in understanding and complying with this Code, (2) understanding and ensuring that the group adheres to applicable conduct policies for partner organizations, (3) coordination of any reporting/investigation necessary under this Code. Any suspected violations should be reported to one of these people. Project leaderships will ensure that Field Ethics Officers are appropriately trained for the role. 
The Field Ethics Officers should, ideally, be (a) from different institutions, (b) working on different aspects of the project, (c) of different gender presentation. For large groups, it is also recommended that there be no less than one Field Ethics Officer for every twenty crew members, and, in cases where projects require subdivision, that there be at least one Field Ethics Officer in each distinct subgroup. We recognize that it is unlikely that any group of field researchers will be able to identify two members of the group which have no overlap in spheres of influence, research communities, or circles of friendships. The suggestions above are to reduce bias by ensuring as little overlap as possible between the two (or more) Field Ethics Officers with respect to those with whom they have close relationships, either working or personal, and to ensure that as broad a cross-section of the field crew is comfortable approaching one of them as possible. Project leadership should endeavor to designate Field Ethics Officers that will allow for anyone experiencing an ethical issue, such as sexual misconduct, to go to a person unconnected with the perpetrator, and with whom they feel comfortable discussing the issue. 

Field Ethics Officers: _____________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________

Reporting to Partner Organizations 
Moreover, the Field Ethics Officers will be (1) familiar with reporting requirements that partner organizations (including those funding the field work) have established under their grants or other project agreements, for reporting potential or actual violations of conduct standards, and (2) will promptly report those issues as required by the partner organization(s). Additionally, the Field Ethics Officers will be responsible for taking direction from these organizations in the conduct of any investigation of potential inappropriate conduct in the context of the field research. 
Designation of Ethics Partner Institution
The project leadership, in coordination with the designated Field Ethics Officers, will determine one of the participating institutions to be the project’s Ethics Partner Institution. They will work with the Ethics Partner Institution to ensure that the relevant authorities there (e.g., Title IX office, Office of Research Integrity) are aware of the relationship, the adoption of this Code, and that any necessary agreements are in place before field work begins. All members of the project agree that the code of conduct and ethics-related policies of the Ethics Partner Institution will apply to all group members. This includes governance and conduct of investigations, Title IX reporting actions, and all other aspects of ethics and conduct related policy. By designating an Ethics Partner Institution, we have the ability to clearly resolve complaints and allegations under a single unified set of policies. We also have the ability to draw upon the institutional infrastructure for unbiased investigation of ethics related complaints. In cases of ambiguity or conflict, however, this Code, as the unifying code of conduct for this project, takes precedence over the policies of the Ethics Partner Institution, and any investigation or other action taken by the Ethics Partner Institution should acknowledge this. 
We do, however, recognize that the disciplinary policies of the Ethics Partner Institution will be difficult to apply in cases where group members belong to different institutions. We will work closely with all institutions involved to share findings from any investigations with relevant institutions, and ensure fair treatment of all, including appropriate consequences for offenders and protections for victims, regardless of their institutional homes.
Ethics Partner Institution: _________________________________________________________ 
Retaliation
We prohibit retaliation against any individual who reports potential violations of this Code, or the code of conduct or policies of the Ethics Partner Institution, or who participates in an investigation (either internal, external, or criminal) of such reports. Any attempt by a member of the group to intimidate, penalize, or threaten a person who reports or who is otherwise involved or cooperating in the investigation of a report of a potential violation is strictly prohibited. Any person found to have participated in an act of retaliation will be disciplined accordingly. 

Investigation Process

Field Ethics Officers will report any instances of misconduct to the project leadership (unless the project leadership is involved in the complaint), as well as report to the Ethics Partner Institution and any other applicable partner organizations (such as funding organizations). If this report does not trigger an investigation from the Ethics Partner Institution, the Field Ethics Officers will initiate an internal investigation of the complaint, which begins with a conversation with the person bringing forward the complaint. The Field Ethics Officers have the discretion to remove a team member from the project while an investigation is taking place, if they believe the temporary removal of the team member is in the best interest of the team and the successful completion of the field work, and/or appropriate to uphold the letter and spirit of this Code.
As stated above, we are committed to a victim-directed process, which means honoring the desires of the victim as much as possible. The Field Ethics Officers will consult with the victim throughout the investigation process, ensuring that they know and understand what the victim desires, with regards to outcomes, privacy, and other concerns. 
If the Ethics Partner Institution or other partnering institution (such as a funding organization) takes over the investigation, the Field Ethics Officer will ensure that there is someone functioning in the role of victim’s advocate, which may be the Field Ethics Officer or a different group member designated by the Field Ethics Officer (depending on whether or not the Field Ethics Officer is taking a leading role in the investigation, and thus requires objectivity). 
If the initial report does not trigger an investigation from the Ethics Partner Institution (or other partner institution), the Field Ethics Officers will initiate an Internal Investigation. Such an investigation will be led by the Field Ethics Officers, with input from the project leadership. The leader of the investigation will attempt to determine the facts of the case through interviews with relevant parties, including members of the crew and staff of any facilities in use. The investigator will (1) maintain strict confidentiality during the investigation, (2) keep detailed, contemporaneous notes of all investigation steps, and (3) prepare a written report of findings after investigation is completed. Internal investigations will be completed in a timely manner. Report and contemporaneous notes will be submitted to the project leadership, unless they are involved in the complaint. See below for possible actions that may result from findings of such an investigation. 
In most cases, the initial report from the Field Ethics Officers will likely trigger an External Investigation from the Ethics Partner Institution (or other partner institution), which will be undertaken in accordance with the policies and practices of that institution. Every effort will be made by the project leadership and Field Ethics Officers to maintain a victim-directed process, but the amount of control that the victim will have on the process will depend upon the policies of the investigating organization. The Field Ethics Officers will be responsible for coordinating with the external investigating organization, taking direction from them throughout the investigation process to ensure the success and objectivity of the investigation. In cases of external investigation, the Field Ethics Officers will ensure that there is a victim’s advocate who can advocate for the victim’s rights and desired outcomes.
Following from our core principles, any and all investigation procedures will strive to accomplish the following:
The victim is shepherded through the process by Field Ethics Officers and project leadership who understand the procedures and “next steps” at each phase of the process;
The victim is given as much control over timing and how to proceed through the process as possible, consistent with the objectives of the Code to promptly address and end any misconduct and/or abuse;
Victims are not re-traumatized — this includes ensuring that victims are not required to restate their story multiple times to multiple people; are not required to come face-to-face with the accused crew member; are not questioned directly by the accused crew member; and do not have their past sexual history considered by the Field Ethics Officer, project leadership, the authorities of the Ethics Partner Institution, etc.;
The process is completed in a timely manner so that the victim does not have to “re-live” the trauma of the event for a prolonged period of time;
The accused crew member may be removed or suspended during the course of investigation, either internal or external, if there is any evidence that the crew member is a continuing threat to the victim and/or other members of the crew;

Outcomes and Sanctions 
Outcomes from any conduct investigation should be focused on preventing recurrence of conduct issues and supporting victims. Disciplinary sanctions are a useful tool towards these goals, and will be applied in a manner that prevents further misconduct, protects victims from re-traumatization, and is fair and appropriate to the findings of the investigation. 
We recognize that, as an inter-institutional group of researchers, our authority to impose academic and professional sanctions is limited. Given these circumstances, however, we will administer outcomes and sanctions resulting from conduct investigations such that:
All sanctions and outcomes are administered in a manner that is fair and appropriate to the findings of the investigations;
Results of investigations where there is a finding of misconduct will be reported to the offender's funding entity, employer, and/or academic institution;
When appropriate, sanctions may include, but not be limited to: 
Official reprimand; 
Demotion in author lists and other forms of professional recognition for participation in the project;
Creation of channels of communication and collaboration that allow for professional isolation between victim and perpetrator; 
Orders of no contact between victim and perpetrator; 
Removal from project leadership position or other position of authority within the project; 
Removal from the project entirely;
Prohibition from future collaboration with other project participants, for durations up to and including life.
Any crew member found to be responsible for attempted or completed sexual misconduct will have a comprehensive report of the incident sent to their home institution and supervisor, and all efforts will be made to ensure that this report is available to all relevant parties, including potential employers and transfer institutions. It will, however, be up to the home institution if additional disciplinary sanctions will be applied outside of the context of the project. 
Additionally, any recommendation or reference from the project leadership for participants found to be responsible for attempted or completed sexual misconduct will be accompanied by this report. 
Where the sanctions and consequences imposed by the project leadership does not satisfy the victim, the project leadership will make every reasonable effort to help the victim seek outside recourse and locate a channel for their complaints with the ability to help find a path forward for the victim, including initiation of external investigation through the Ethics Partner Institution, outside mediation or arbitration, and/or the initiation of legal proceeding. 
Agreement
Agreement with the principles and norms given in this document is a requirement for participation in the project. The undersigned have read and understood this Code of Conduct, and agree to follow its precepts in good faith. 
Signatures:


Additional resources:
This Code of Conduct was prepared with reference to a large number of other resources, including publicly available codes of conduct and ethics for various academic, non-profit, governmental, and other institutions; published research on conduct issues, and available training resources for conduct and ethical issues in research and education. We provide here a list of resources we have found valuable in the creation of this Code, in the hopes that others may also find them useful.
Academic Articles & Reports
Bahn, S. (2012). Keeping academic field researchers safe: Ethical safeguards. Journal of academic ethics, 10(2), 83-91. Link.
Bernard, R. E., & Cooperdock, E. H. (2018). No progress on diversity in 40 years. Nature Geoscience, 11(5): 292. Link.
Buck, M., & Hamilton, C. (2011). The Nagoya Protocol on access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity. Review of European Community & International Environmental Law, 20(1), 47-61. Link. 
Chaudhary, B., & Berhe, A. A. (2020). Ten simple rules for building an anti-racist lab. PLoS Computational Biology, 16(10): e1008210. Link. 
Merritt, M. W., Labrique, A. B., Katz, J., Rashid, M., West Jr, K. P., & Pettit, J. (2010). A field training guide for human subjects research ethics, PLoS medicine, 7(10). Link.
Nelson, R. G., Rutherford, J. N., Hinde, K., & Clancy, K. B. (2017). Signaling safety: Characterizing fieldwork experiences and their implications for career trajectories. American Anthropologist, 119(4), 710-722. Link.
Sekerka, L. E. (2009). Organizational ethics education and training: A review of best practices and their application. International Journal of Training and Development, 13(2), 77-95. Link.
Woodgate, R., Fitzhugh, B., Harrington, S., Litchendorf, T., St John, H., Buick, R., Friedman, C., Brencic, D.,Basu, B., Lazzar, R., & Boget, E. (2018). Preventing Harassment in Fieldwork Situations: Report from the University of Washington’s Respect and Equality in Fieldwork (REIF) 2017 Committee. REIF – Respect and Equality in Fieldwork University of Washington Committee. Link.
Other Codes of Conduct and Policies for Reference
The University of Oregon has policies that are thorough and well documented, as well as a Student Conduct Code that is detailed and relatively clear. There is also a useful summary of some relevant policies created by their Office of Affirmative Action and Equal Opportunity.
The National Geographic Society has a Code of Ethics that may be particularly well suited to this sort of work, including a section on Professional Conduct that is covered in their Nondiscrimination and Anti-Harassment policy. They also have an excellent Authorship & Acknowledgements policy, which covers many relevant ethical issues.
The California Native Plant Society’s Code of Ethics for Botanists is an excellent resource. 
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has made their Employee Responsibilities and Conduct policy public. 
The School for International Training Study Abroad program has made public their entire set of policies, including sections on Harassment and Research Ethics. 
The Transgender Law Center provides sample policies for companies and organizations to draw from when crafting policies and codes of behavior that are inclusive of the transgender community.
Syracuse University makes their Student Handbook public, including sections on academic integrity, conduct, and sexual harassment, among other relevant topics.
The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has published several useful policy guidance documents related to harassment. 
Training Resources

We highly recommend utilizing resources through the Ethics Partner Institution and other partner institutions to provide appropriate training to all crew members, and specifically to Field Ethics Officers. Granting organizations that have reporting and conduct requirements will also typically provide resources for ethics and conduct trainings if requested. 
We provide here a selection of ethics- and conduct-focused training courses and materials, many of which have an academic focus. However, it should be noted that nearly all available research ethics courses are designed specifically with clinical research in mind, and may require adaptation for a field research context.
We specifically encourage project leadership to ensure that Field Ethics Officers receive training that specifically addresses such key topics as confidentiality, protected information, appropriate documentation, evaluation of emotional states and identification of needs based upon that evaluation, chains of reporting and reporting requirements and best practices, when to involve law enforcement, and the legal rights and responsibilities of involved parties, among other topics. 
It is important to engage with institutional partners early in project planning, and in presentation of and training in this Code in a manner that is appropriate to the project context. Engagement with the Ethics Partner Institution during planning stages will ensure that lines of communication and expectations are well established should there be any need for involvement by the Ethics Partner Institution in any situation. 
 
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) makes their training materials available online; it is rather dated and has a strong clinical focus, however. Similarly, research ethics training materials from the Office of Research Integrity (ORI) of the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is freely available online, though these materials also present a strong clinical focus, and appear not to have been updated since 2003.
The University of Oxford has made public an adaptation of a World Health Organization (WHO) internal ethics course, though the site has been down for updates since March of 2020. The updated course will also likely have a strong clinical focus. 
The Training and Resources in Research Ethics Evaluation (TRREE) courses integrate local issues and perspectives from low- and middle-income countries, specifically from an African perspective. These courses also have a strong clinical focus.
Lastly, many academic institutions and government offices utilize the services of third-party, for-profit training services. It is possible to purchase training courses and materials through many of these, including EVERFI, which is used by State University of New York (SUNY) College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF), and the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI Program), which is used by “thousands of academic institutions, government agencies, and commercial organizations around the world”, including the University of Oregon. These training options are generally very expensive, and will not be tailored to the particular needs of the field research team, but access may be extended to the full research team if project leadership or the Ethics Partner Institution has access through institutional affiliation. 





